avis-activity-log.md, before:

# Antoine Viscardi's Activity Log

## 13 Dec 2018
- Finished implementing grid search
- Implemented dumping of best model after every grid-search iteration
	- Want to find a way of logging at which epoch the model was saved and with what accuracy.
- Implemented dumping of the history and utility function to plot it.
- Ran the whole pipeline over night

## 02 Dec 2018
- Added top down accuracy and it works well.
- Next steps:
	- Implement for other split strategies
	- Do grid search on hyper parameters: 
		- lstm_size [16, 32, 64]
		- lag     [1, 5, 15, 30, 60, 90] revert back to 30 if too much computations
		- dropout [0.0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, ..., 0.4]
	- Run the algorithm on the other stocks

### Meeting with SE
TODO:
- Refactor lag function so that lag=10 means you have 10 time steps.
- 


## 01 Dec 2018
- Finally managed to make my model work. 
- I strongly beleive that the data has to be rearanged in 3D
	- number of observations (samples)
	- number of timesteps per observation
	- number of features (input dimension)
- I manage to train the training and validation error quickly stabilize. It looks weird.
- Also, it seems like weights are not reinitialized between runs. I have to figure that out.
- Finally, I have to figure out how to test the model. 
	- Simply do predictions and manually compute a score?

- I fixed weird training curve behaviors by scaling the data. I think LSTMs are very sensitive to scaling.

## 29 Nov 2018
- The data is set up (train, val, test).
- I implemented the LSTM based on SE's previous implementation.
- Should the data be normalized (MinMaxScaller)?
- I am confused about the dimensions of the LSTM, namely, how many cells and what exactly each dimenesion of the the 3D input tensor represent. 
	- Keras defines LSTM input as 
		3D tensor with shape (batch_size, timesteps, input_dim), (Optional) 2D tensors with shape (batch_size, output_dim).
	- Does that mean 
	- I will ask SE about that.
	- I suspect that I would have inputs of `batch_size=X.shape[0]`, `timesteps = 1`, `input_dim = X.shape[1]` but I have a very hard time wrapping my mind around that.


## 27 Nov 2018
- Generated figures for the four different data split strategies (basically learned how to use Inkscpape on the spot)
- Setup dev environment with Tensorflow and Keras
- Started watching Hvass' intro tutorials on Tensorflow and Keras on Youtube.
- Read [good blog post][3] on RNNs and why LSTMs (special form of RNNs) are so popular.
- Implemented functions to save the cleaned and filtered data localy and to retrieve it.


## 26 Nov 2018 (Meeting)
Antoine:
- Figures for data split
- Integrate everything with LSTM
- Figureout error rates (Read the paper, **Up/Down accuracy**)

- First step: use fixed origin and run all the stocks through it.


## 25 Nov 2018
- Refactored the methods to generators. 
- Finished implementing the other 3 strategies. 
- Started briefly investigating other more complicated methods presented by [Bergmeir & Benitez][2].

TODO:
- Determine how to evaluate models (methods for computing error). Should be able to find this information in [Bergmeir & Benitez' paper][2].
- Further investigate other methods of spliting the data.
- Integrate everythin so that we can at least test the LSTM and start generating results and graphs.
- Generate figures explaining each strategy.


## 23 Nov 2018
- Merge all branches on master
- found a [good paper][1] on current state of economic forcasting methods.
- found a [paper][2] dating from 2010 which compares 3 methods. I will implement these first.
- Cleaned data_cleaning.py module
- Finished implementing first spliting strategy: **Last Block Evaluation**.

TODO: 
- Refactor to iterator objects
- Finish implementing 3 other iterators


## 20 Nov 2018 - Meeting with Jonathan Lauraine
- Splitting data is well studied, many way to do.
	- One critical choice is choice of time frame. (Maybe you don't want to train on all the data.)
	- Try bunch of different ones.
	- Look into ways of splitting Train-validate sets. (see picture)
- Dealing with NANs, multiple ways to do this. (average over larger timeframe, fill with what you *think* it could be.)
- Many stocks: One model per stock or on model for all the stocks (hyperparameter again). One asset would be perfectly fine given the scope of the project.
- Comparing to baseline. 
- Be wary of look ahead bias

### Follow up meating with team
- Train model on one stock. (Can swap the stock at the end)
- Decide on stocks we will train/test on (Thomas)
- Implement different functions for splitting training/testing sets and for dealing with NAs. (Antoine)
- Implement Attention + LSTM model (Seung Eun)

- Leave last 10% for testing. Do training/validation on remaining 90%.


## 18 Nov 2018 - Short meeting about Prof. Grosse's email.
- Our main concern is time: already put lots of effort on data processing for financial time series **and literature review**. 
- In his opinion, would switching to waveforms represent an important overhead, or would the data be readily accessible and easy to implement.

- Thomas will do the talking.


## 15 Nov 2018
- Filtered market data to keep only the stocks continuous over the entire time series.
- Small bug where when importing the csv, thi time is a string, easy fix.
- 522 stocks from market data are continuous
- installed matplotlib
- looking at distribution of news data presence to understand better understand the sparsity


## 13 Nov 2018 
- Merged all branches to master, everyone should branch off from there and avoid deleting files
- Created python script for data cleaning (as opposed to doing it inside notebooks).


## 12 Nov 2018 - Meeting
- How do we deal with missing data?
	- Filter stock with only continuous data (market and news)
	- Make sure we only have continuous data (news + market), that is, filter out stock with missing data.
	- If data is very sparse, 
		- Average over a week / months
		- Could engineer a feature with the number of headlines included / sum of the relevances / etc.
		- Don't spend more than 2-3 hours on this.


## 05 Nov 2018
- Look into other kernels exploring the data. Things to consider for futur implementations:
	- Look for data errors: ridiculous spikes. Maybe replace those points with means.
- Current implementation: `dropna(inplace=True)` on both dataframe after slicing desired columns and before merging.
- Still struggling to merge market and news data. 


## 04 Nov 2018
- Started thinking about how to preprocess and clean the data for the Vanilla Net.
- Started implementing the cleaning code.


## 03 Nov 2018
- Familiarized myself with the competition rules, goals, data and framework.


[1](https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.28.2.3)
[2](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025511006773)
[3](http://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/)

Commit message:

finished runing tests with best models following grid search

avis-activity-log.md, after:

# Antoine Viscardi's Activity Log

## 14 Dec 2018
- Finished grid search on INTC.O
- Looking at results, train_loss is sometimes much higher than val_loss.
	- Keras provides an explanation for this: https://keras.io/getting-started/faq/#why-is-the-training-loss-much-higher-than-the-testing-loss
- Sent results to Thomas
- Performed test with the best models and sent the results to Thomas.

TODO:
- Integrate other splitting methods
	- Use same hyper params as INTEL for other assets
- Train model with same params on other stocks


## 13 Dec 2018
- Finished implementing grid search
- Implemented dumping of best model after every grid-search iteration
	- Want to find a way of logging at which epoch the model was saved and with what accuracy.
- Implemented dumping of the history and utility function to plot it.
- Ran the whole pipeline over night


## 02 Dec 2018
- Added top down accuracy and it works well.
- Next steps:
	- Implement for other split strategies
	- Do grid search on hyper parameters: 
		- lstm_size [16, 32, 64]
		- lag [1, 5, 15, 30, 60, 90] revert back to 30 if too much computations
		- dropout [0.0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, ..., 0.4]
	- Run the algorithm on the other stocks

### Meeting with SE
TODO:
- Refactor lag function so that lag=10 means you have 10 time steps.


## 01 Dec 2018
- Finally managed to make my model work. 
- I strongly beleive that the data has to be rearanged in 3D
	- number of observations (samples)
	- number of timesteps per observation
	- number of features (input dimension)
- I manage to train the training and validation error quickly stabilize. It looks weird.
- Also, it seems like weights are not reinitialized between runs. I have to figure that out.
- Finally, I have to figure out how to test the model. 
	- Simply do predictions and manually compute a score?

- I fixed weird training curve behaviors by scaling the data. I think LSTMs are very sensitive to scaling.


## 29 Nov 2018
- The data is set up (train, val, test).
- I implemented the LSTM based on SE's previous implementation.
- Should the data be normalized (MinMaxScaller)?
- I am confused about the dimensions of the LSTM, namely, how many cells and what exactly each dimenesion of the the 3D input tensor represent. 
	- Keras defines LSTM input as 
		3D tensor with shape (batch_size, timesteps, input_dim), (Optional) 2D tensors with shape (batch_size, output_dim).
	- Does that mean 
	- I will ask SE about that.
	- I suspect that I would have inputs of `batch_size=X.shape[0]`, `timesteps = 1`, `input_dim = X.shape[1]` but I have a very hard time wrapping my mind around that.


## 27 Nov 2018
- Generated figures for the four different data split strategies (basically learned how to use Inkscpape on the spot)
- Setup dev environment with Tensorflow and Keras
- Started watching Hvass' intro tutorials on Tensorflow and Keras on Youtube.
- Read [good blog post][3] on RNNs and why LSTMs (special form of RNNs) are so popular.
- Implemented functions to save the cleaned and filtered data localy and to retrieve it.


## 26 Nov 2018 (Meeting)
Antoine:
- Figures for data split
- Integrate everything with LSTM
- Figureout error rates (Read the paper, **Up/Down accuracy**)

- First step: use fixed origin and run all the stocks through it.


## 25 Nov 2018
- Refactored the methods to generators. 
- Finished implementing the other 3 strategies. 
- Started briefly investigating other more complicated methods presented by [Bergmeir & Benitez][2].

TODO:
- Determine how to evaluate models (methods for computing error). Should be able to find this information in [Bergmeir & Benitez' paper][2].
- Further investigate other methods of spliting the data.
- Integrate everythin so that we can at least test the LSTM and start generating results and graphs.
- Generate figures explaining each strategy.


## 23 Nov 2018
- Merge all branches on master
- found a [good paper][1] on current state of economic forcasting methods.
- found a [paper][2] dating from 2010 which compares 3 methods. I will implement these first.
- Cleaned data_cleaning.py module
- Finished implementing first spliting strategy: **Last Block Evaluation**.

TODO: 
- Refactor to iterator objects
- Finish implementing 3 other iterators


## 20 Nov 2018 - Meeting with Jonathan Lauraine
- Splitting data is well studied, many way to do.
	- One critical choice is choice of time frame. (Maybe you don't want to train on all the data.)
	- Try bunch of different ones.
	- Look into ways of splitting Train-validate sets. (see picture)
- Dealing with NANs, multiple ways to do this. (average over larger timeframe, fill with what you *think* it could be.)
- Many stocks: One model per stock or on model for all the stocks (hyperparameter again). One asset would be perfectly fine given the scope of the project.
- Comparing to baseline. 
- Be wary of look ahead bias

### Follow up meating with team
- Train model on one stock. (Can swap the stock at the end)
- Decide on stocks we will train/test on (Thomas)
- Implement different functions for splitting training/testing sets and for dealing with NAs. (Antoine)
- Implement Attention + LSTM model (Seung Eun)

- Leave last 10% for testing. Do training/validation on remaining 90%.


## 18 Nov 2018 - Short meeting about Prof. Grosse's email.
- Our main concern is time: already put lots of effort on data processing for financial time series **and literature review**. 
- In his opinion, would switching to waveforms represent an important overhead, or would the data be readily accessible and easy to implement.

- Thomas will do the talking.


## 15 Nov 2018
- Filtered market data to keep only the stocks continuous over the entire time series.
- Small bug where when importing the csv, thi time is a string, easy fix.
- 522 stocks from market data are continuous
- installed matplotlib
- looking at distribution of news data presence to understand better understand the sparsity


## 13 Nov 2018 
- Merged all branches to master, everyone should branch off from there and avoid deleting files
- Created python script for data cleaning (as opposed to doing it inside notebooks).


## 12 Nov 2018 - Meeting
- How do we deal with missing data?
	- Filter stock with only continuous data (market and news)
	- Make sure we only have continuous data (news + market), that is, filter out stock with missing data.
	- If data is very sparse, 
		- Average over a week / months
		- Could engineer a feature with the number of headlines included / sum of the relevances / etc.
		- Don't spend more than 2-3 hours on this.


## 05 Nov 2018
- Look into other kernels exploring the data. Things to consider for futur implementations:
	- Look for data errors: ridiculous spikes. Maybe replace those points with means.
- Current implementation: `dropna(inplace=True)` on both dataframe after slicing desired columns and before merging.
- Still struggling to merge market and news data. 


## 04 Nov 2018
- Started thinking about how to preprocess and clean the data for the Vanilla Net.
- Started implementing the cleaning code.


## 03 Nov 2018
- Familiarized myself with the competition rules, goals, data and framework.


[1](https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.28.2.3)
[2](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0020025511006773)
[3](http://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/)
